I'm blanton of the National Security
Archive judge gearheart gazelle made it
official today no jail time for Oliver
North your reaction I think a lot of
people were surprised I know this
morning one of North major backers Rob
Owen we've been his courier to the
Contras had predicted before the
sentence was handed down that this was a
hanging judge and surely there would be
jail time but when you look at gazelles
actual order it seems that he followed
almost directly the conclusion of his
jury and and that was to say Oliver
North you were really the subject you
were manipulated you were the
subordinate within a larger complex
scheme with some cynical superiors
fascinating language he used and that
you're not really you shouldn't have to
pay the price
partial price there's 1,200 hours of
community service that's a serious
commitment that's 30 work weeks $150,000
even for Oliver North who can make a
speech in ladies $25,000 a night that's
a significant amount of money I think it
did surprise a lot of people including
Norse very strong supporters but on the
other hand it's pretty consistent with
the with the jury verdict
Sam Dickens here with the American
security council foundation your
reaction well I don't really feel that
that I had any surprise at all when you
think that the jury found him guilty of
the things that he confessed before the
jury and nothing else there had to be a
significant sentence I didn't I think
that the judge really had to take into
his own sentencing the facts that he
knew and also the involvement of others
and I think the judge Gesell and talking
about what he made a comment about some
cynicism of the leadership above Oliver
North reflects that so in sentencing he
was taking all those things into
consideration not just that he was
guilty of those elements I think it is
one could nitpick you no one can say
150,000 dollars that's a lot of money
maybe the judge took him to consider
he can raise that money fairly easily
aid to this to people working all these
hours I would hope that it would be in
support of refugees of Nicaragua and
then he could argue resistance that's
how we got into this mess isn't it
because of the Congress I think that
Oliver North would be delighted to go to
Miami and other places and help the
illegal not the illegal but the
immigrants that have been forced out of
Nicaragua and potentially the the
combatants that were no longer
apparently willing to support and many
of them will be streaming into Miami in
those regions and Oliver North would
probably be delighted to help them
although I think he's gonna be here in
DC working with drug offenders and that
was the act the actual designation of
the senate's which would be a that many
hours working with drug offenders here
in DC being a sense a soldier in William
Bennett's war on drugs
pretty interesting sentence and it's
also an indication of what gizelle
thinks there is is a major crime yes but
maybe some people really don't
understand that Oliver North was really
working and against drugs I mean that's
one of the things that the people don't
seem to realize the nexus between
Nicaraguan the Sandinistas and Fidel
Castro and Cuba despite all these
attacks on a chore because güstrow has
been deeply involved in drug trafficking
and now Noriega is so all these things
are interrelated and Oliver North was
working very much against drugs before
and it looks like he will be now we're
gonna be talking about to the sentencing
of Oliver North and we invite your
questions and your comments for our two
guests first let me introduce you to Tom
Blanton you've heard from first in our
program he is with the National Security
Archive as deputy director what is that
organization we're a library of the
classified government documents
essentially what we're trying to do is
pull together all the materials that the
government has ever released on the
national security foreign policy issues
and apply some of the latest
technologies computerization some of the
basic principles of library science try
to make them really accessible really
for the first time most of these have
that kinds of documents been lingering
in the basements of people like sam
dickens and myself for years and years
never accessible anybody else who wanted
to study them and wanted to draw the
opposite conclusion that samurai might
draw so our goal in life is to be open
to the public is to try to provide that
kind of
service and educate provide to enrich
the policy debate to provide more access
to documents they're really essential to
this kind of study and this kind of
argument does the organization have a
political point of view nonpartisan
nonprofit located at the Brookings
Institution funded by a lot of different
foundations who also sponsor research on
foreign policy our basic goal in life is
to talk about documents to get them out
of the public debate to try to get away
from a lot of the night on a source kind
of Washington press that often occurs
and we're all familiar with and try to
get back it's not so much that the
documents themselves are truth but
they're at least fixed in time and you
can use them if you base your arguments
on those you based your research on
those I think we'll all be better off
Sam Dickens is with the American
Security Council foundationist director
of inter-american Affairs what's the
foundation all about well we've been in
the business for some thirty five years
under the leadership of John Fisher
chairman and chief executive officer and
the focus is on national security issues
from a bipartisan support area you can't
have a national security policy of this
country without having bipartisanship so
the focus has always been on that
gaining support for critical issues in
foreign policy and defense and getting
bipartisan support and going forward
since identifying critical issues
gaining support within the Congress for
those issues and then trying to get the
legislation through the foundation
aspect which I'm with is surely
educational today sentencing of Oliver
North definitively close any chapters in
the iran-contra story it really didn't
because there are a series of other
trials that are happening and in a sense
gazelles basic order that North was
manipulated subordinate of cynical
superiors points directly toward a trial
that will supposedly start it by the end
of this year of Admiral John Poindexter
nationals former national security
adviser to the president in many ways
that trial may be more earth-shaking or
it may be less earth-shaking the main
thing that happened in the North trial
was whole batches of new information
came out because Casal essentially
forced the government to release
previously classified materials that
shed some new light light that the
congressional committees had only gotten
or gotten a short ray of sunshine a few
of these arrangements we have the CIA
agent Joe Fernandez his trial is this
summer over in the Northern District of
Virginia
you've got following him see Court and
Hakeem who are on trial for some of
these other issues including the secrets
case a series of counts of perjury
before Congress and his congressional
testimony he wasn't immunized he was the
first witness I think as we all know and
then you have John Poindexter if John
Poindexter pulls the same defense that
Oliver North did which is I was carrying
out the orders of my superiors as
opposed to what he said in the
congressional committees the buck stops
with me
if Poindexter goes with it was my
superiors there are only a couple of
superiors to John Poindexter and that's
the former president and the current
president and if he does that that trial
could be quite a lot of fireworks on the
other hand if he could take a plea
bargain given that North was convicted
so I think the saga actually continues
in many ways however there are all kinds
of different ways these different trials
could work out but it's gonna be on the
front pages I think for the rest of this
year and on tonight I'd like to see a
little bit more happen from an
educational standpoint and I don't think
it hasn't been done sufficiently for
example the National Security Council
staff is the arm of the President when
they speak they're speaking for the
president I think it was a mistake for
example for Oliver North and Poindexter
to go over to Congress the one to go
over to Congress is the President of the
United States and the separation of
powers and they are not members of the
State Department they're not members of
the Defense Department or the FBI they
are his personal staff and when they
speak they're speaking for the president
and I don't think enough attention has
been paid to that aspect of it so when
they when the Congress was going after
Poindexter in Oliver North they were
really going after the president they
wanted to see they wanted to weaken
President Reagan and they were trying
with a Boland amendment to usurp the
powers of the president I'd like to see
more in that educational aspect to come
out I'm very disappointed that the
Reagan administration did not challenge
the Boland Amendment has really been
unconstitutional from the separation of
powers they didn't
but I also feel very clearly that the
National Security Council was exempt
from the Boland Amendment no I know that
that's the spirit I'm talking about the
way I look at the Constitution and the
separation of powers that the National
Security Council was not an intelligence
gathering organization very clearly I
mean all the years that I spent in
government I've never thought and I
don't know anyone who ever thought that
the NSC had anything to do with an
intelligence gathering and the Boland
Amendment clearly was narrowed and
written that way if the Boland if Bolden
had wanted to ride it another way to
embrace everyone in government it would
have been very easy to do and about the
ones things and he didn't do it but
that's the president's fault why he
didn't do it why he didn't challenge I'm
disappointed because I think that Oliver
North was really doing what he was in
general generally directed to do this
bit of President Reagan saying I want
you to keep body and soul body and limb
together of the Nicaraguan resistance
when you have a job like that to do and
you're a military man whether you're
Admiral Poindexter or you're Colonel
north you're gonna do all it's possible
to gain the success and I think they had
a very very much an understanding of the
stakes in Central America what they mean
to the United States and if any of these
people that were opposed to what
President Reagan wanted to do in
Nicaragua with a Nicaraguan resistance
looked at the situation today looked at
Panama looked at Cuba looked at what's
going on in El Salvador with increased
arm they'd know that we have failed
miserably and why did we fail it was a
Congress that failed to step back to one
thing in mr. Dickens said just in terms
of the intent of Congress because I
think you listen to Senator in a way has
made at least one speech that I know of
on this subject they deliberately cut
short the iran-contra investigation for
fear of weakening the president and I
think in his speech he said we
determined that if the President
President Reagan knew about the
diversion of funds to the Contras then
he was impeachable and we'd move right
away to an impeachment resolution if he
didn't know about the diversion in front
of the Contras then he wasn't
impeachable and by dragging on the
investigation and going to all these
corners that a lot of which came out in
the North trial we would simply weaken
the presidency give Gorbachev more
freedom to move and therefore we cut it
off we set a deadline
we're already and we have our lines just
about all lighted up right now we're
going to go to the calls and if you get
a ringing sound stay with our line and
I'll get you just as quickly as we can
in the thirty minutes we have left let's
go first up Carson California you're on
the air hello I just want to say I
really don't think that I wasn't no I
forgot what he do there you should have
gotten some time and as far as him going
into community working with these kids
with the drug thing these kids I already
feel as if if you have enough money you
can buy your way out of anything and
they equate contra and Iran with drug
smuggling I don't think that's been in a
very positive message to them I'll hang
up the little bit all right thank you
well first I think you have to realize
who Lieutenant Colonel er Lieutenant
Colonel Oliver North is he's a graduate
of the u.s. Naval Academy is a very
distinguished heroic combat record in
Vietnam he has suffered terribly here he
felt he believed one could argue about
whether everything he'd done everything
that he did was absolutely proper
everything correct one might even
question some elements of his judgment
but no one could question what he was
trying to accomplish and why he was
trying to do it for his president and
he's working in the National Security
Council and he's trying to support
something that he realized as a critical
interest in our own national security
that's why I think that he has suffered
tremendously if you know Oliver North
from what has happened to him his family
has suffered tremendously know from that
aspect I don't think at all that he
should be serving sentence he'd do a
great job in the inner city he's a true
believer he's a great proselytizers you
could tell from his appearance on
national television he can make people
believe him I think he's a he's a leader
a very effective leader very charismatic
I think in those senses he could be very
effective in the inner city be pretty
interesting assignment we'll see how it
turns out reaction to the sentencing of
Oliver North we go next to Ann Arbor
Michigan you're on the air I am all
right okay I have a comment a question
like
is this to understand what is been
happening in Nicaragua there is a vital
piece missing from the puzzle this piece
I'm referring to a right are American
organizations that have been working
with the Sandinistas and other Central
American revolutionary groups on their
behalf now gentlemen what about groups
such as witness repeats the committee in
solidarity with the people of El
Salvador the Nicaragua Network etc etc
what about these groups what is their
influence and what about the fact right
that a lot of prominent Democrats have
been working with these groups I mean
literally democratic party is sitting on
a time bomb a powder keg and I am kind
of surprised at the Republicans do not
seize on this and just go for the
jugular I mean what have with Jim right
and the S&L scandal it's nothing
compared to this fine
you know I am torn the same way being a
military man and having spent a year in
Vietnam in Vietnam as an operations and
a squadron commander close their
supports to the to our own forces and
the South Vietnamese forces how you
conduct the support of an ally and
friends our allies by the Rio treaty in
Central American I'm talking about the
Salvadorans and you talk about
supporting the Nicaraguan resistance
fighting clearly a self-identified group
as communist and what they're doing I'm
really torn that this country could
allow all these different groups under
our freedoms really to be supporting the
communist government it has really
bothered me and of course we have to
come back to the executive it's because
of the way the executive department
handled it one could say one needs to
declare war which is a responsibility of
Congress but historically in conducting
these sorts of efforts we haven't since
we reward to declared war against anyone
but we've been deeply involved in
fighting communism I think more could
have been done to prevent these sorts of
actions and group supporting the exam
I would not have allowed I wouldn't have
allowed us to have diplomatic relations
with Nicaragua I think they should have
been cut and that would have prevented
these groups from going into Nicaragua
and supporting them I'm the question of
diplomatic relations and one of the more
interesting things that just happened
with the Afghanistan when we cut off the
relationship the diplomatic relations in
Afghanistan I think we suffered as some
some dearth of intelligence reporting
coming back from what was happening
inside the regime it may be and I think
some intelligence analysts have made the
may they made the suggestion that by
closing our embassy we actually shot
ourselves in the foot because we then
underestimated the staying power of the
regime whereas if we'd have the embassy
there it serves other purposes a you
know from from that perspective and then
beyond that I think you know the story
of groups involvement in Central America
I think there have been a lot wide range
of those on all sides of the issue from
all different perspectives you mean
they're sure that there shouldn't be no
there shouldn't be because that the real
treaty has has stated that we would be
opposed to common communism exported by
aggression subversion or terrorism oh
why are we allowing all this to happen
why aren't we invoking the Rio treaty
why aren't we responding to that
president Osceola invoked the Rio treaty
when he asked for the 82nd airborne the
9th Infantry Division to go into under
us Oscar Arias president of Costa Rica
said when he's asked about what would
you do if you be invaded he said well
I'd invoke the Rio tree why are we
talking about the Salvadorans as our
lives well that's the interesting
question I mean I one of the most
interesting things that happen in the
Salvadoran elections that I'm aware of
was a national television appearance
with out Freddie Fredo Christiani who's
now the president who was the candidate
of what was seen as the very right-wing
conservative party and a joint
appearance with felony Ruben Zamora who
was the Secretary General of the
left-wing
what's the democratic convergence that's
allied with it with the with the
guerrilla movement yet their own
television together both denouncing US
intervention in their country from both
sides of it that there was too much less
control it's an interesting that you're
seeing that sure enough they said it
clearwater florida you're on the air
Claire waters on the air thank you I've
been very upset by this whole long
ordeal in the continuing huge cost to
Colonel North I resent the fact that
very few people even refer to him by his
title which he burned very with very
hard I was a Navy wife for 20 years of
an unsired Island we had and he was a
sail
I mean I know what it's like to be a
service wife and I know what it's like
to be afraid this is a very brave man
and I think he's been badly treated by
former President Reagan I was I find it
very difficult to ever forgive him for
not pardoning Colonel North because I
don't think what it whatever he did was
wrong
whatever he did he always had his heart
in the right place and this the because
Congress is so full of pro-communist
apologists but it's frightening to me
you know nobody ever talks about the
fact that before Noriega there was the
tryst and Carter was very friendly with
him and it was well known that he was a
drug dealer and Carter knew it and he
kept it hushed up I mean I take a
monthly publication that gives me this
information and they wouldn't publish it
if it weren't true because it's a free
that unit for anybody to read also um
whatever he did was nothing compared to
what James Wright did all the illegal
shenanigans he did and he went home with
a huge war chest and a fantastic pension
and with no criminal activity and he's
never gonna be prosecuted and I think
this is wrong I just don't understand my
country with the way they act of the way
they treat their veterans all right
thanks very much it's it's an
interesting point because in terms of
Ronald Reagan's responsibility to
Colonel North because Colonel North
essentially said he was following orders
of Ronald Reagan essentially and that
therefore all these illegalities that
were alleged were essentially the
problem of his superiors if you're going
to be the fall guy if you're going to be
the subordinate taking orders Ollie
North's essentially sat in the courtroom
and pointed his finger up it disappears
Ronald Reagan being at the top of that
pyramid
it's fascinating just in terms of the
Senate
to compare back to some of the Watergate
trials where sentences jail sentences
were very common but one must remember
where those started those started when
Judge Sarika was trying to get a couple
of the Watergate burglars to talk and he
had threatened him with jail terms and
he put him in jail to make him talk and
it was communications from the jail that
McCord finally started talking about the
whole apparatus that set up Watergate in
this case it wasn't a problem with
people taught not talking in fact Oliver
North at his trial talked at length and
talked at length about how superiors
that ordered this and in fact
introducing the evidence this mammoth
stipulation 42 pages of event after
event after event participated in by
President Reagan and Vice President Bush
and secretary Shultz and secretary
Weinberger and director Casey and the
whole range of top national security
officials basically saying look it
wasn't just me it wasn't just a little
lieutenant-colonel North it was all
these folks don't hold me to account for
this well I think loyalty is a two-way
street and I don't believe that Oliver
North expected to be a fall guy would
there be no support of the line for him
I feel very strongly that President Bush
at this time at this time now should
pardon Oliver North
one could argue the need to go through a
trial you can say the pros and cons go
through it go through a conviction go
through sentencing that has been done
now is a time to pardon Oliver North
here his retirement pay has been taken
away once he was found guilty now he has
these other charges hanging over his
head and where is the responsibility
then as far as the speaker of the house
is concerned why wasn't the logo Logan
Act for example brought into play no one
but the executive are allowed to conduct
foreign policy and look at the dear
commandant a letter that the Democrats
signed to to the Sandinistas and the way
they really undercut the President and
conducted their own foreign policy so I
feel how is it that for example Oliver
North can be punished this way and the
speaker of house walks away with an
incredible retirement pay
was 69 charges for unethical behavior
which he's not going to stick around to
face and we handled as a speaker of the
house handled a dear commandant a letter
and undercut the President of the United
States foreign policy conducted his on
foreign policy I'm no expert on Jim
Wright I do think that you may have a
lot of company out there in your clarion
call I mean I think just this afternoon
at the courthouse representative Dornan
came to the courthouse with a petition
signed by 58 or 59 members of Congress
however he was a little deflated by the
sentence I think he was quite surprised
and he essentially said well I'll just
hold my petition for now essentially I
think that interpretation said that this
the sentence of no jail time no matter
what the amount of money was or the
hours was definitely not what he
expected and it deflated his call for a
pardon so I don't know that you're out
there with a big multitude right now
calling for that that was interesting
Temple City California you're on the air
yeah hello I think that what he was just
saying they're about pardoning North is
totally wrong he should be sentenced to
prison and Bush and Reagan along with
him this is just making the cover-up
complete if they pardoned north well I I
don't think that there very many people
that share that that point of view the
President of the United States is
responsible for conducting policy to
guarantee the security of these United
States and that's what he was trying to
do the Congress in its majority was
opposed to that and yet those
responsibilities clearly are on
President Reagan's shoulders now one
could argue that he should have kept on
his fight going more and more to the
people to override Congress's objections
that's one of my criticism I think when
President Reagan said I am NOT going to
lead this crisis to another president
and he was talking about Nicaragua I I
don't forgive him for leaving the crisis
for President Bush but to say that
President Reagan or
Oliver North are those are criminals
when they're standing up for the
security of this nation with their
understanding of it now I don't know
what your understanding is of all the
incredible intricacies of foreign policy
and national security but Oliver North
understood them as a career military
officer and I think President Reagan did
too I just think the story is not over
yet and we'll we'll see what else comes
out I think there's still an independent
prosecutor they are still leveling
perjury counts they still have a grand
jury in session looking at the people
who testify before Congress they just
recently brought charges against Secord
there are a lot of unanswered questions
and this tale is by no means over before
we go to our next call I could tell you
a little bit more about our two guests
Sam Dickens with the American security
council foundation as you mentioned he
had a military career spent 28 years in
the Air Force retiring as a colonel his
last assignment was as director to
Western Hemisphere affairs of plans and
policy for the US Air Force also sir I
lived in Latin America for 14 years and
served as a fighter pilot in Korea and
Vietnam is a graduate of West Point
Tom Blanton with the National Security
Archive co-authored for that
organization a chronology the documented
day-by-day account of the secret
military assistant to the Iran and to
the Contras he was a former journalist
with the Atlanta Journal and
constitution and has also been published
in the New York Times he is a graduate
of Harvard and was editor of the Harvard
Crimson during his studies there we go
next they tell us everything is going
way back to Florida and the bar beats
you're on the air love you program I'm
gonna direct this all the time because I
love that man he's a really fantastic at
least he's got the guts to set up there
and tell people the United States what
really Harlan North is I think it's a
shame that they convicted Hawley in any
way shape form or fashion I don't know
the other people over there I heard he
was a Harvard man and I don't think he
knows what he's talking about anyway I
appreciate this whole Bali's listen to
this man that I would retired and I
found a little extra job and it'll it'll
give me something
until I leave I'll make sure that I put
every penny of that income to him and
I'm behind him 100% all Americans should
be behind him all Americans real
Americans thank you thank you for the
call either guests have a reaction to
that call it
well it's your fan club thank you well
you can see where he stands without any
question and support for Oliver North
and I do think it's time to have the
pardon now some people might argue their
other trials but you know Oliver North
is the one that's been through the trial
and it's time to pick up the wounded
from the battlefield he'd been on the
battlefield he was on one that was very
physical and on another form of
battlefield and it's pretty physical the
way it's affecting him and I think it's
time for President Bush to pick up the
wounded and bring him back I think it's
very interesting the caller's point
about the conviction because he
basically says Oliver North shouldn't
have been convicted I think it's
interesting because the jury said Oliver
North should be convicted of the three
specific things that he admitted in the
courtroom having done any minute is
guilt and they all dated from the time
of the scandals coming out into public
and the period of the cover-up of the
scandal and it's that sequence of events
this sort of overreaction to cover-up
and his admission of that and his
admission of trying to cover up the
bribe from the sea court those were the
things he was convicted of the larger
counts the the counts before the scandal
went public those were the things the
jury said that's the responsibility of
the higher-ups that's President Reagan
that's pointing to excess McFarlane and
don't overlook McFarland's role in all
this because as a witness he appears to
been very very frustrating to the
special prosecutor he appears to be very
very frustrating to Judge Gesell who
various times during his testimony
interrupted him on the stand what are
you talking about talk speak straight
come on mr. McFarlane and the fact that
McFarlane had struck a struck a bargain
and got a suspended sentence I think
played very heavily and Gizelle's notion
McFarlane after all was one of the
superiors he did sign his name to those
letters that Oliver North - drafted and
McFarlane does bear responsibility he
did show the remorse and so forth but I
think neither gazelle nor this the
Independent Counsel were very satisfied
with his performance I think there's a
little language about in the independent
price of the independent counsels
to the judge asking for a prison term
for oliver north where he says well
about mr. MacFarland you know at least
he related the facts extensively if not
perfectly which is an interesting kind
of San Antonio Texas here on the air
caller glad to hear from you as an
ex-army nurse they served in two wars
and I don't feel that Oliver North
should get anything Congress passed the
confusing laws the Boldin amendments and
I feel that they would have better
served our country if they paid
attention to the saving of loans meant
which will cost more than the Vietnam
War Congress is a poor example and
making foreign policy and all they
really think about is getting reelected
most the time and they seem to be more
concerned about China and they are about
Nicaragua which is right on our borders
just a quick response that Oliver North
was not charged with violating the
Boland Amendment he was charged with
some very specific obstruction of
justice destruction of documents aiding
and embedding and lying to Congress and
accepting a gratuity the government
official you're not supposed to accept a
gratuity took a security fence it's
interesting I don't know mr. Dickens has
been out to the house but if our I guess
who was at Abu Nidal that the North said
I got the security minister protect my
family from Abu Nidal I was ably need
all I could drive right through that in
my you know little Chevy Nova it's not a
very sturdy fence it certainly wouldn't
protected from terrorists or from any
one of the truck bombs or car bombs the
traditional way that they blow up people
instead it does keep on lookers away
from the house it keeps the TV cameras
away from the house
it's a nice security fence to provide a
little bit of insulation to your family
it's not much protection against
terrorists who had blow up a Pan Am
jetliner I think that was a little that
was somewhat disingenuous for anybody
has actually seen the fence and his
covering up the fact of having accepted
it from Secord I think was what
convinced the jury to hold him guilty on
that Kim
accepting a bribe but the sad part I
think really is is the focus on oliver
north is not the correct focus the focus
really should be on the Congress this is
why all these things developed and the
lady had been a nurse the call from San
Antonio talking about the Boland
Amendment focuses on the umbrella that
brought about all the problems and that
Bullen amendment was designed to hog-tie
the administration and President Reagan
so that he could not conduct his own
foreign policy and it's the separation
of powers it really is the issue and
it's not being addressed it's falling by
the wayside of course that's where I I
hold the President Reagan responsible
for not standing up and getting rid of
the war challenging the War Powers Act
challenging the Boland Amendment because
ever since Vietnam that has been the
difficulty that we've we've continued to
face and until that's addressed that who
is responsible for foreign policy not
the Congress but the President of the
United States we're gonna continue to
have problems those top national
security people in the ready
administration had a great discussion
right on this point I think in June 1984
and as a result of the North trial we
have the minutes of that that meeting
I've got him over off the set here be
glad to give you a copy because they're
really instructive because it's
President Reagan and Vice President Bush
and Schultz and Weinberger and Casey and
Meese and others
I guess Meese wasn't there because they
talked about going to talk the Attorney
General who was in French Smith and they
have this discussion about they they're
looking at Congress about to cut off the
funds to the Contras and they're talking
about how we've got to put together some
funds from third countries and even
though McFarlane @rx accepted several
millions of dollars from the Saudis or
solicited that money he didn't inform
the larger group larger group sort of
pensively thinking about this and George
Shultz speaks something says well you
know Jim Baker who was then the chief of
staff Jim Baker tells me that if we went
around Congress like this we went off
and raised money from third countries
when Congress says note says said no
appropriated funds why that could be an
impeachable offense and bill Casey's
jumps in there and says no no no that's
not right I'm a lawyer too Jim Baker's
not the only lawyer around here I know
today and really it wouldn't be
impeachable and she'll says no no no you
gotta understand the Constitution says
that only the Congress can appropriate
money all right the executive can't do
that that's the that's the
between having a king and having a
president and then KCI McFarland others
demurrer and they say no no not really
and the end of the meeting McFarland's
actually says we've got to go off and
talk to the Attorney General and get an
opinion about whether this is legal so
the next day and this memo is reprinted
in the iran-contra committee report they
go talk to William French Smith say well
what would make it legal can we go talk
to these third country's information
missus yeah three three requirements one
you got to tell Congress if you raise
money for third countries and two there
can't be any direct US money involved
and three there can't be any promise any
quid pro quo and if you do those three
then it's legal
well if you look at what happened
according to the documents in the North
trial and according to Oliver North's
own testimony none of those three things
were carried out that would have made it
legal in the opinion of William French
Smith they never told Congress not about
the Saudis their word there were direct
expedited aid and Oliver North's own
handwriting signed off by Ronald Reagan
and the memo of February of 85 you can
see that that they hand that discussion
they talked about specifically at that
point what was constitutional what was
separation of powers what can we do they
concluded what was legal all only five
minutes left in the program Reno Nevada
yes I do agree with the gentleman that
spoke before this one President
Roosevelt during the Second World War
when Congress said there shall be no
arms sent to help in the war in our
allies at the time it was England what
President Roosevelt had done was he had
our boys fly secretively the airplanes
to the border of the United States then
I can I have films of where the Canadian
came with horse and buggy and rode the
planes over to Canada thereby the
president was trying to circumvent the
law and and Ted Sorensen said that he
under President Kennedy President
Kennedy never consulted Congress went
during the Cuban Missile Crisis it was a
a fact and under the Constitution he had
the right to dicta to run foreign policy
so what happened with Colonel North is
just a fact that mr. right decide
to go to Nicaragua and run the foreign
policy and he was an unethical man
alright thanks for the call but I don't
think that Oliver North is unethical I
think when it becomes comes to unethical
behavior it squarely falls on the
shoulders of some of the people and in
Congress but you know Franklin D
Roosevelt did another thing when you
were talking about that that was really
significant and it shows the courage
that the president takes in defending
his country and leaning his country when
he knows he has to defend it he sent us
Navy pilots to train the Royal Air Force
command in flying the PBY Catalina I
raise that now because everyone's
talking about the Bismark that's been
discovered on the floor of the Atlantic
off off the coast of France the pilot
who saw the Bismarck was a co-pilot to
her Royal Air Force was a US Navy pilot
this is before we entered World War Two
is before Pearl Harbor the next Catalina
that came on after that one to maintain
the visual contact with the Bismarck
also had a US Navy officer flying it and
this is what a president did with
courage now you could say it was illegal
at the time but the president has a
responsibility for defending this
country and taking the proper action he
also has to take the hits and I'm
worried most right now that President
Bush is worried about how Congress has
affected President Reagan's
administration because of the
iran-contra affair and is not showing
the proper courage with respect to the
Nicaragua resistance Nicaragua Panama
and Noriega and a little cost from Cuba
things are getting worse and I can't see
with them this administration is doing
to take care of the situation
that's building daily rockville maryland
hi mr. Dickens lives up to his name in
the fiction that he paints about the aid
El Salvador the private Republican
donors who contribute to the Central
American problem I haven't been
discussing the fiction that Ollie north
lived poor Ollie north out in Great
Falls Virginia which is one of the most
luxurious area we live in this area but
I just like to say well if all he's
doing 1200 hours of community service in
amongst the malnourished tortured
poisoned children
he helped poison by assisting in the
dope business in the United States
I wonder why conservatives aren't
calling for the death penalty for Ollie
north because that's where they seem to
put their faith in stopping this drug
traffic well I think it's absolutely
ridiculous Oliver North was not involved
in anything to do with drug trafficking
or any cocaine movement or helping
people that were that's the figment of
the imagination of the people that have
wanted to attack say the Nicaraguan
resistance it's barely it's very clear
from the reporting and analysis that's
being done who has been involved in the
cocaine trafficking if I've been
following it for at least 10 years on a
daily basis when you talk about Oliver
North my goodness living where he lives
a lieutenant-colonel doesn't get all
that much pay he isn't on flying status
either so he doesn't have that kind of
Augmented pay it's very difficult for
him to live where he lives but to raise
that as some sort of an issue when you
don't even know what kind of mortgage
payments he's had to pay or how he's
getting along with his salary is is it's
really a canard jump in just on that
part of it I thought that was the
probably the part of the prosecution at
the trial that the Independent Counsel
probably had the most fun with and that
was the magic tin box and all the
North's closet with the $15,000 and that
that was the explanation for everything
in terms of their ability that by pay
cash for used car or whatever they
brought in used car salesmen to describe
how North had come in with a certain
amount of cash wasn't quite enough went
away came back the next day with the
right amount of cash he had his
co-workers in the National Security
Council describe how you know up until
1985 Oliver North was always borrowing a
dollar here or $2 there for cab fare or
whatever and also miraculously in the
summer of 85 this was their testimony he
didn't have he needs no I don't say it's
a fast I don't know what your experience
is on something like that but I've known
people have been very wealthy and you're
when you're with them they never have
any money and who needs to pay or pick
up the lunch tab someone who doesn't
have that money yesterday just you enter
that is right the security fence you
wouldn't take a security fence that's go
or engine one minute left caller we got
a hurry okay couple quick questions
concerning the constitutionality of the
Boland Amendment let's suppose the
question of constitutionality of the
Boland Amendment was determined before
North poindexter and secord and her team
testified before Congress and the courts
determined that the Boland Amendment is
unconstitutional all right well let it
go out there
let me basically all that they they did
their own legal opinion inside the
National Security Council it's
instructive it was the only one they got
on the constitutionality of Bowen
whether it applied to the National
Security Council and the guy who did at
Bretton Scaroni had flunked the bar a
couple of times he was a fairly
low-level lawyer they never made it
public and essentially Bretton Scaroni
concluded that well Bowen probably
applied to the NSC but even if it didn't
it applied Oliver North's salary from
Louisville we're out of time gentlemen
I'm going to say thanks to both of you
for being here Tom Blanton with the
National Security Archive Sam Dickens
with the American Security Council
foundation both in our Studios here in
Washington to give their reaction to the
sentencing of Colonel Oliver North thank
you